Doc/issue 280 file format (#283)
AlphaGenes/AlphaPeel: docs/source/file_formats/data_file_formats/haplotype.rst

.. _hap_file_format:

Haplotype
=========

Format
~~~~~~

There are two lines per individual.
The first line provides information on the paternal haplotype, and
the second line provides information on the maternal haplotype.
The first value in each line is the individual's ID.

> The remaining values are *haplotypes* at each locus,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The remaining values are *haplotypes* encoded with *allele dosages* at each locus
(:ref:`see the section on encoding alleles <zero_one_two_etc>`).
```

> The remaining values are *haplotypes* encoded with *allele dosages* at each locus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The remaining values are alleles at each locus forming *haplotypes*
```

Reviewer: Is this clearer?

> with alleles encoded as ``0``, ``1``, or ``9``. 

Reviewer: Remove this line

> (:ref:`see the section on encoding alleles <zero_one_two_etc>`).

Author: @gregorgorjanc I agree with this comment that we may need to make it explicit for haplotypes, as the data encoding is primarily written for genotypes.

> (:ref:`see the section on encoding alleles <zero_one_two_etc>`).

Reviewer: Yes, this comment exposed that the suggestion was not optimal. See the above suito address this issue. I will resolve this comment now.

> See :ref:`the section on encoding alleles <zero_one_two_etc>`.

Reviewer: Remove this line

(because males don't inherit X chromosome from the father), 
while the second line provides information on the maternal haplotype.  

Example with four individuals and their X chromosome genotypes at four loci
(id1 and id3 are males, while id2 and id4 are females):

::

  id1 9 9 9 9 # Paternal haplotype
  id1 0 1 1 0 # Maternal haplotype
  id2 1 0 1 0
  id2 0 1 0 1
  id3 9 9 9 9
  id3 1 0 1 0
  id4 0 1 1 0
  id4 0 1 0 0

Input details
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The file contains *observed haplotypes* for each phased genotyped individual; 
possibly from previous analyses.
If provided, values from this file are translated to genotypes,
and the phase information is not preserved 
(see :ref:`genotype input details <genotype_input>`).
Therefore, the order of maternal and paternal haplotypes is not important.
The file does not need to include all individuals present in other files.
Only loci on one chromosome should be provided!

.. relate to issue: https://github.com/AlphaGenes/AlphaPeel/issues/279

The X chromosome functionality for haplotype input is not tested, so do not use it.

Output details
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The file is saved as ``.hap_THRESHOLD.txt``.

> The file contains *called haplotypes* for each individual,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The file contains *called haplotypes* for all individuals from all inputs.
```

> encoded as ``0`` and ``1``, or ``9`` when

Reviewer: Replace these last two lines with:

When probability is too low to make the call,
haplotype alleles are encoded as missing/unknown
(:ref:`see the note on encoding alleles <zero_one_two_etc>`).

.. _hap_file_format:

Haplotype
=========

Format
~~~~~~

There are two lines per individual.
The first line provides information on the paternal haplotype, and
the second line provides information on the maternal haplotype.
The first value in each line is the individual's ID.

> The remaining values are *observed haplotypes* at each locus,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The remaining values are *haplotypes* at each locus,
```

> encoded as ``0`` and ``1``, or ``9`` when the value is missing. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with alleles encoded as ``0``, ``1``, or ``9``.
See :ref:`the note on encoding alleles <zero_one_two_etc>`.
```

Reviewer: Remove 0/1/9 business and link to the `Allele and genotype encoding` section.

Example with four individuals and four loci:

::

  id1 0 1 1 0 # Paternal haplotype
  id1 0 1 1 0 # Maternal haplotype
  id2 1 0 1 0
  id2 0 1 0 1
  id3 0 1 1 0
  id3 1 0 1 0
  id4 0 1 1 0
  id4 0 1 0 0

When working with the X chromosome, for a female individual, the interpretation
is as for an autosomal chromosome above. For a male individual, 

> the first line will always be ``9``, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the first line will have all alleles encoded with ``9``
(because males don't inherit X chromosome from the father), 
```

> the second line is the value of the maternal haplotype.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
while the second line provides information on the maternal haplotype.
```

Example with four individuals and their X chromosome genotypes at four loci:

> 

Reviewer: Fix as in the other comment

id1 and id3 are males, while id2 and id4 are females:

::

  id1 9 9 9 9 # Paternal haplotype
  id1 0 1 1 0 # Maternal haplotype
  id2 1 0 1 0
  id2 0 1 0 1
  id3 9 9 9 9
  id3 1 0 1 0
  id4 0 1 1 0
  id4 0 1 0 0

Input details
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> This file has two lines with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> *observed haplotypes* for each phased genotyped individual; 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The file contains *observed haplotypes* for each phased genotyped individual; 
```

possibly from previous analyses.

> If provided, values from this file are translated to genotypes,

Reviewer: Add a link to genotype input details here as that's what's effectively happening here, right?

and the phase information is not preserved. 
Therefore, the order of maternal and paternal haplotypes is not important.
The file does not need to include all individuals present in other files.

> Only loci on one chromosome should be provided!

Reviewer: Ensure that this line is present on all inputs that provide genotype or haplotype information input.

> The X chromosome functionality for haplotype input is not tested, so do not use it.

Reviewer: Add a link to the issue for this so we and users can track when this is addressed.

Output details
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If produced, the file is saved as``.hap_THRESHOLD.txt``.
The file contains *called haplotypes* for each individual.

> There are two lines per individual,

Reviewer: Remove this line and all the lines below. We describe all this in the format above.

one for each of the paternal and maternal haplotypes of the individual.
The first value in each line is the individual ID.
The remaining values are called alleles at each locus,
encoded as ``0`` and ``1``, or ``9`` when

> the probability is to low to make the call

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the probability is too low to make the call
```

Input details
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The file contains *observed haplotypes* for each phased genotyped individual; 
possibly from previous analyses.
If provided, values from this file are translated to genotypes,
and the phase information is not preserved 
(see :ref:`genotype input details <genotype_input>`).
Therefore, the order of maternal and paternal haplotypes is not important.
The file does not need to include all individuals present in other files.
Only loci on one chromosome should be provided!

.. relate to issue: https://github.com/AlphaGenes/AlphaPeel/issues/279

The X chromosome functionality for haplotype input is not tested, so do not use it.

Output details
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The file is saved as ``.hap_THRESHOLD.txt``.
The file contains *called haplotypes* for each individual.

> The remaining values are called alleles at each locus,

Reviewer: I think best if you drop this line and connect the above sentence with the rest below:
`… for each individual
encoded …`
